Feat: add article ml (#373)
BedrockStreaming/tech.bedrockstreaming.com: _posts/2022-08-26-machine-learning-if-else.md

---
layout: post

> title: Is machine learning a unicorn hiding a succession of “if” and “else”?

Reviewer: Je me demande si "succession" signifie, en anglais, la même chose qu'en français ?

Antidote dit :
> French-English in the following sense: relation or relative

Mais j'ai du mal à être sûr à 100% si ça veut effectivement dire qu'on ne peut pas utiliser "succession" ici.

J'aurais dit "serie", qui me semble plus certain niveau sens :

> a group of objects that are perceived, or events that happen, one after the other

description: Let's think about what is behind machine learning
author: n_saby
tags: [machine learning, Data Science]
color: rgb(251,87,66) # this is Bedrock color here
---

Recently, a colleague asked me:

> "All good with your if and else machine learning system?”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> All good with your if and else machine learning system?
```

It was a joke but this one made me think. 

*This is a running gag: machine learning is only a succession of “if” and “else”.*

![unicorn in the forest](/images/posts/2022-08-26-machine-learning-if-else/unicorn_forest.jpg)

Beyond the joke, it is true?

Yes! …and no. As always, it depends.

**Quick answer**: Machine learning is a bunch of mathematical and statistical operations. Sometimes, the operations you use can be translated into “if” and “else” clauses, and sometimes not. But you never write the succession of “if” and “else” yourself.

## A recap of machine learning

> As a recap, with machine learning, you have data, you apply an algorithm on these data to detect patterns that is grouped as a function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea of machine learning is: you have some data, you apply an algorithm on these to detect patterns that is grouped as a function.
```

⚠️ "that is grouped" me choque. "data" et "patterns" sont des pluriels, donc "is" ne va pas, il faudrait au moins "are". Mais même ainsi, je me demande si le groupage est sur les données ou sur les patterns ?

Reviewer: Ou c'est "grouped" qui pourrait être remplacé par un autre mot ?
"expressed" peut-être, dans le sens "… des patterns exprimés sous forme de fonctions" ?

> ![ml recap schema](/images/posts/2022-08-26-machine-learning-if-else/ML%20recap.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![machine learning representation schema](/images/posts/2022-08-26-machine-learning-if-else/ML%20recap.png)
```

Then, you'll be able to use this function on new data to extract new information.

## A decision tree with a succession of “if” and “else”

There are different types of machine learning. If you decide to build a decision tree (a famous way to do machine learning), you’ll get something like that:

> ![decision tree](/images/posts/2022-08-26-machine-learning-if-else/decision_tree.png)

Reviewer: Question d'ignorant : "carat", ça veut dire quoi ? ça a sens ? Ca a quelque chose à voir avec les diamants ?

If you translate it with code, you’ll get something like that:

```python
if carat is high:
    return red plate
else:
    if size is high:
        return red plate
    else:
        return grey pentagon
```

> **Then, yes, you can see that here, we have a succession of “if” and “else”.**

Reviewer: "succession", cf plus haut

mais si on code cette suite de if/else, où est le "learning par la machine" ? C'est pas un humain qui a appris ce qu'il fallait pour écrire ces if/else ?

Reviewer: (en écrivant ça, je me demandais si tu créais du suspens et que tu allais répondre à ma question après -- et vu les titres plus bas, oui. OK, top :-))

## But, many algorithms in machine learning are just the generation of plain mathematical formulas

Let’s take another famous way to do machine learning: a neural network. What we’ll get at the end is more something like that: 

```
a*10+b*15+c*16+20…
```

Then, the process doesn’t try to find a succession of “if” and “else”, but a mathematical formula.

I would like to finish with a last example: recommender systems. There are many ways to build a recommendation system. One which is well known is matrix factorization. 

*Matrix factorization, what?*

I won’t explain deeply what it is about, but as a sum up, it’s a manipulation of matrices. It comes from linear algebra.
Here is a definition: [Matrix decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_decomposition).

The result is something like that: 

```
Vector A * Vector B
```

**As a result, yes, you have types of machine learning that will generate a succession of “if” and “else”. But, you have also plenty of algorithms that try to find the variables of an equation or vectors.**

> ## You never write the succession of “if” and “else” yourself

Reviewer: Je crois que je reste un peu sur ma faim sur cette section, qui me semblait être le coeur de l'article : je m'attendais à ce qu'elle dise un peu plus "comment" le ML génére l'arbre de if/else ?

Let’s go back to the decision tree. As we’ve seen, the result could be translated as a succession of “if” and “else”.

But, you don’t write directly this code. You generate it using… mathematical operations. Yes, again! 

You’ve got different ways to get it and I won’t explain them. 
As an example, you can get the result of a decision tree using the Shannon Entropy which is a mathematical formula:

![shannon entropy formula](/images/posts/2022-08-26-machine-learning-if-else/formula.png)

If you want to know how it works, you’ve got this article: [Classification in machine learning - Example of Decision Tree with Shannon Entropy](https://medium.zenika.com/classification-in-machine-learning-example-of-decision-tree-with-shannon-entropy-945fc8e2a3fb)

> **Then as a result, yes, you can’t have machine learning algorithms that will build a succession of “if” and “else”. But to generate it, you’ll use mathematical operations.**

Reviewer: "you can't" ou "you can", ici ?

## So why do we sometimes say that machine learning is a bunch of “if” and “else” statements?

To my opinion, because of expert systems. They are the ancestors of machine learning in artificial intelligence.

> Artificial intelligence is a way to simulate human cognitive abilities. In the history of artificial intelligence, we thought that we’d be able to target that with expert systems. These are big successions of hardcoded rules and then... of “if” and “else”.

Reviewer: Je suis content de voir "systèmes experts" : c'est un terme que j'ai déjà entendu, c'est à peu près "le niveau de connaissance que j'ai", donc ça me permet de créer un lien "Ah OK les if/else c'est ça ; et le ML c'est plus que ça"
